---
layout: post
title: "Trying to hard to make uncool cool"
description: "Trying to hard to make uncool cool"
category: Geek Life
tags: [programming]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

#### ... Or Embracing the Suck ####

I've had a Yahoo Mail account for almost 15 years, at the time I got it it was basically for travelling
where accessing a POP server from a Web Cafe was not possible or would have been a real pain in the but.
Even when I got it back in 1999 there was a shortage of names available.  Of course kris and kriserickson
and kerickson were all gone, so I tried kson34 which was my university account name.  The univeristy account
name was autogenerated by the university as the first letter of my first name,last 3 letters of your last name,
plus however many kson's the University had had before me -- so no, 34 was not
my age when I got the email or the year I was born (I'm old, but not that old).  However when I tried something
as cryptic as kson34 as my user name the name was also already taken (this is perhaps the first time I realized
how big Yahoo and the internet really were) and it came back with a bunch of suggestions - ksoncan34 was the
one I took.  What has always annoyed me about the Yahoo Mail was that because I took the yahoo.ca version mail
sent to ksoncan34@yahoo.com does not arrive to me, it just goes into the ether (since I own the .ca version,
no one can own ksoncan34@yahoo.com -- maybe Marissa can fix this issue, but I doubt its high on the list of
problems with Yahoo Mail).

So that is why I have a cryptic Yahoo Mail address, however it hardly explains why I have kept using that
yahoo address when Yahoo Mail is so terrible.  I got an invite to and had an account with Gmail since late 2004,
and initially considered moving mail from yahoo to Gmail.  However, 5 years of piling up people with my Yahoo
address had kept me trapped in their eco-system.  Plus an interesting thing began to happen, yahoo started got
very scared of Gmail and finally improved Yahoo Mail.  No longer was it a weekly task to delete old mail (the original
Yahoo mail was limited to what is now a very laughable 10 megs of storage) as the mail size improved to 2GB (the same
size the Gmail boasted they were starting with) and if got in on the Yahoo mail beta the interface was almost better
than Gmail's (if you didn't buy into Gmail's system of tags and archiving everything).  So because my yahoo address was
out there, and yahoo mail kept improving, my Gmail account was basically my spam account (Gmail used to be better than
Yahoo mail at Spam, now for me, they are [a little too aggressive](/2013/12/30/the-end-of-the-windows-desktop)).
That changed earlier this year when as part of my switch to android, I started forwarding all my mail to Gmail and
started reading mail through Gmail as non-Gmail clients on Android suck (this finally was fixed in Android 4.4) and
I couldn't take advantage of many of the Google Now features without pushing my mail through Gmail.

However I have resisted in informing anyone of this change (though as I respond to mail from Gmail that was sent to my
Yahoo address this cause my Yahoo mail address to eventually get lost) since I am kind of enjoying the trailer trash
chic of having an email address from the wrong side of the tracks.  I am trying to make it the new hipster thing to rock
a Yahoo address, and now that Gmail is largest email provider on the planet, it hardly seems unique or techy to have
a Gmail address.  And so I keep the ksoncan34 moniker in [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ksoncan34).

